---
layout: home
title: HUB XC410: Spark! DS4G Practicum
nav_exclude: true
permalink: /:path/
seo:
  type: Course
  name: HUB XC410: Spark! DS4G Practicum
---

## Course Description

DS4G Practicum enables students to tackle real world data challenges
related to a more equitable and just society. Students will work in
teams on projects provided by a variety of partners from the public
sector including government agencies, nonprofits and researchers.
Projects will vary depending upon partner needs but will be focused on
producing a technical artifact that may include researching and
developing robust data pipelines to publish public data sets, creating
interactive tools or applications, or completing data-focused research.
All projects should address pressing societal challenges in the public
sphere.

While each student team will have a unique experience based on the
requirements of their assigned project, the course will encompass five
distinct parts:

1.  Teamwork, collaboration, and project/ client management

2.  Computing and Data science: data collection, data engineering, data
    > preprocessing, and analytics and/ or software development

3.  Testing, refinement, delivery, and documentation of technical
    > artifacts

4.  Research synthesis and presentation of the final deliverable

The projects will begin with a human and community centered design
process with the stakeholders most impacted or impacting the proposed
project topic or output. Desk research and stakeholder interviews will
help students understand the root causes of the societal issues that
will be addressed through the course. The course will conclude with
final presentations of findings to the partners, and a final work
product or technical artifact which will include thorough documentation
of work completed or the solution and the associated research and design
process. By applying their computing and data science skills to real
world challenges or questions sourced from public sector partners,
students will help to unlock new data intelligence or technical
solutions that can contribute to more just communities.

## Learning Outcomes

At the conclusion of the course, students will have acquired both
content knowledge on the root causes of a specific societal challenge,
its consequences, and remedies, as well as hard skills related to
designing and building technology or data applications that may
contribute to better public understanding, engagement, or other benefits
sought by the project partner.

# Hub Learning Outcomes

## Creativity/Innovation (CRI)

*BU students across all fields of study will benefit from learning how
to think in new ways, imagine new possibilities, take new approaches,
and/or make new things. Creative activity is a source of deep human
satisfaction and common good. In addition, the ability to generate and
pursue new ideas is quickly becoming a prerequisite for entry into the
skilled workforce, which places a premium on applicants' creative skills
and potential for contributing to creativity's more applied offspring,
innovation. BU graduates should understand how the creative process
moves from need or desire to design, to draft, to redesign, to
execution; they will have personal experience of taking risks, failing,
and trying again; and, in this way, they will have developed the
patience and persistence that enables creativity to come ultimately to
fruition.*

### *Learning Outcomes*

-   *Students will demonstrate understanding of creativity as a
    > learnable, iterative process of imagining new possibilities that
    > involves risk-taking, use of multiple strategies, and reconceiving
    > in response to feedback, and will be able to identify individual
    > and institutional factors that promote and inhibit creativity.*

-   *Students will be able to exercise their own potential for engaging
    > in creative activity by conceiving and executing original work
    > either alone or as part of a team.*

The creativity and innovation component will take place primarily
through the design phase of the course when students will work with
partners to conceptualize or refine the creation of a technical artifact
that will be developed in response to the needs presented by the partner
through the original project scope.

The output of the design phase will be a roadmap of tasks and
deliverables that will be developed during the semester. The solution
will also require validation through engagement of stakeholders impacted
or impact the project; this step will follow the completion of the
research phase of the course.

The prototype presentation will take place approximately halfway through
the course. Included in this deliverable will be wireframes, dataset(s)
identification and any other building blocks necessary prior to the
development / implementation phase of the project. The remainder of the
course will be spent on intensive implementation of the project.

## Research and Information Literacy (RIL)

*Scholarly research---the process of posing problems, designing
effective investigative strategies, collecting and evaluating
information, drawing conclusions, and presenting findings---drives the
creation and dissemination of new knowledge in and across all academic
disciplines, professions, and walks of life. Today's information
explosion places a particular requirement on anyone doing research to
develop the abilities associated with information literacy---knowing how
to locate needed information, assess the accuracy of sources, and use
them to good effect. BU's mission as a research university embraces the
conviction that research and information literacy should be central to
an undergraduate education. By learning from scholars on the BU faculty
how new knowledge is created and disseminated, and by conducting or
participating in research, BU students join a community of inquiry with
a commitment to the pursuit of knowledge that crosses borders and
connects generations.*

*All Writing, Research, and Inquiry courses (found in the Communication
capacity) also develop the learning outcomes of the Research and
Information Literacy area and fulfill one Hub unit in each of these
areas.*

### *Learning Outcomes*

-   *Students will be able to search for, select, and use a range of
    > publicly available and discipline-specific information sources
    > ethically and strategically to address research questions.*

-   *Students will demonstrate understanding of the overall research
    > process and its component parts, and be able to formulate good
    > research questions or hypotheses, gather and analyze information,
    > and critique, interpret, and communicate findings.*

Teams will achieve this learning outcome through focused research and
engagement with stakeholders to understand and, ultimately, validate the
problem and proposed solutions, and respond to in-depth feedback. Once
the initial project proposal or scope is confirmed and team
collaboration and project management practices are established, teams
will craft a discovery and research plan for gathering important domain
knowledge to understand the underlying context for the project. This
will include gathering knowledge through desk research, stakeholder
input, and expert feedback on the issue that will ultimately be
addressed through the creation of a technical artifact.

This assignment is designed to help students gain a deep understanding
of the broader context within which the client\'s need exists. The
deliverables for this assignment include a research and stakeholder
engagement plan and a final report and presentation of the key findings
from the research. Students will reflect upon the input they have
received and the work completed during this phase may result in an
adapted project proposal or scope. The students will engage with
community partners throughout the project journey to gain input and
insights on key assumptions and realities of stakeholders and document
these insights through the sprint retrospectives.

## Teamwork/Collaboration (TWC)

*Training in and the practical experience of teamwork teaches the
process of innovation, develops leadership, and fosters knowledge of
one's own strengths and appreciation for those of others. Collaboration
defines the 21st-century workplace. Employers rely increasingly on
teams---groups of people with different backgrounds and training who
tackle projects jointly---and they identify the ability to collaborate
with these diverse groups as an essential skill for almost every
position. Civic life in an increasingly interdependent world also calls
more and more for the ability to collaborate with people from different
backgrounds and with different perspectives, build consensus, and
compromise for the good of a broader purpose.*

### *Learning Outcomes*

-   *As a result of explicit training in teamwork and sustained
    > experiences of collaborating with others, students will be able to
    > identify the characteristics of a well-functioning team.*

-   *Students will demonstrate an ability to use the tools and
    > strategies of working successfully with a diverse group, such as
    > assigning roles and responsibilities, giving and receiving
    > feedback, and engaging in meaningful group reflection that
    > inspires collective ownership of results.*

The application of teamwork and collaboration learning outcomes will be
centered around the successful completion of a technology artifact using
agile development principles. The teamwork and collaboration process
will be assessed through the development and evaluation of team
agreements to reinforce practices of high performing teams in an agile
development context. Students will have an opportunity to achieve
alignment and set expectations at the beginning of the semester, give
and receive feedback at the mid and end of semester and will be expected
to proactively solve team issues using the feedback and decision-making
tools provided. Team members are expected to contribute equally
throughout the course of the project. Tasks will be distributed among
team members based on their technical areas of knowledge or their
contribution to the qualitative elements of the project.

While students will have specific roles within the group, course content
will cover the design, architecture and development of software or data
science artifacts as a whole, allowing students to appreciate the work
of each member of the team. Throughout the course of the semester,
students are expected to provide each other with continuous feedback;
pair programming and code reviews will allow individual team members to
work together and provide critical feedback on others' code, to improve
the functionality of their projects. Students will practice the scrum
approach to agile development, a common software industry approach to
teamwork, collaboration, and project management. This will include

## Writing-Intensive Course (WIN)

*Writing-Intensive Courses enable students to build upon and practice
skills learned in the First-Year Writing Seminar and, in some instances,
in Writing, Research, and Inquiry courses. Writing is fundamental, the
most important form of expression that BU undergraduates must develop.
In almost every professional setting, BU graduates must be able to
express their ideas in clear, coherent prose. Effective writing demands
the honing of skills, but it also cultivates ways of thinking,
evaluating evidence, constructing responsible and convincing arguments,
and generating creative ideas. As effective writers, BU graduates will
pay close attention to the potential readers of their writings; as
responsible writers, they will take ownership of their message and the
means of communicating it, and hold their writing to high standards of
truth, accuracy, validity, and humaneness.*

*While learning to craft written arguments is essential in the
First-Year Writing Seminar, the Writing, Research, and Inquiry courses,
and most courses designated as Writing-Intensive, the latter also
accommodate students' learning to write to the standards of majors and
professions, such as journalism, that place a premium on the difference
between arguments and expository accounts.*

*Writing-Intensive Courses have the First-Year Writing Seminar as a
prerequisite and develop at least learning outcomes 1 and 2 below.*


### *Learning Outcomes*

-   *Students will be able to craft responsible, considered, and
    > well-structured analyses supported by written arguments, using
    > media and modes of expression appropriate to the situation.*

-   *Students will be able to read with understanding, engagement,
    > appreciation, and critical judgment.*

-   *Students will be able to write clearly and coherently in a range of
    > genres and styles, integrating graphic and multimedia elements as
    > appropriate.*

Written products will include both team and individual assignments.
There will be two team writing assignments including a discovery phase
report which will outline the intended final deliverable and provide
early insights from the research and design phase. The second
deliverable is a final report which will vary depending on the technical
output envisioned for each project. For example, it could be a narrative
report of the technical artifact and the results of user validation and
testing for this artifact. It could be a report on the findings from a
data science project which outlines the methods, findings, and
limitations of the approach taken, or another approach to the final
report proposed by the student team and approved by the instructors.

In addition, there will be two individual writing assignments including
a short reflection piece following the design and research phase during
which students will have direct engagement with stakeholders impacted by
the issues relevant to the project. For the final individual reflection
assignment, students will reflect on what they learned about
community-centered technology development projects, and what they
learned about high performance teams, team dynamics, and resolving team
conflicts.

# Course Format

In addition to regular lectures, we will also have project working
sessions. During the project working sessions, we will work on
assimilating material covered in lecture into our projects.
Additionally, students will have a dedicated time each week outside of
class where they will engage in hands-on work sessions with their eams
and/or meetings with clients/partners. Spark! project managers, tech
engineers, and when schedules allow, Experts in Residence will be
available during these session times.

There will be four phases of the course:

-   **Preparation**: Team agreements, scope and methodology

-   **Discovery**: Research and stakeholder engagement

-   **Design**: Detailed specifications for the proposed technical
    > artifact including any of the following elements, as necessary:
    > user flow, user stories, data identification, wireframes, product
    > specifications

-   **Delivery**: Weekly development sprints to ensure completion of the
    > prototype and final report by end of semester

This course has neither a mid-term nor a final exam. Performance will be
graded based on completion of assignments and the final project which
includes weekly development sprints.

## Team Resources

Students are also able to access computing services e.g. AWS credits,
etc. They must be requested at this link and we will assess the request
and get back to your team as soon as possible. Please see
[[https://buspark.io]{.ul}](https://buspark.io) or discuss with the PMs
or Instructors for details.

Each team is allowed up to \$200 for incidental expenses directly
associated with implementing their project (i.e. not pizza, etc.). You
can submit receipts or procurement requests through this form:
[[https://bu.campusgroups.com/]{.ul}](https://bu.campusgroups.com/). For
questions, please email Spark Finance team at
[[buspark\@bu.edu]{.ul}](mailto:buspark@bu.edu).

# Books and Other Course Materials

A functioning laptop with a power cord, about 800 MB of free space and
administrative privileges to install software. Bring your laptop to each
and every class. Please do not hesitate to see us privately if you have
any concerns about this requirement. We're happy to help.

There is no required textbook for this course. However, there are
required readings. Usually articles found on the Internet.

## Courseware

-   Piazza:
    > [[https://piazza.com/bu/spring2023/xc410]{.ul}](https://piazza.com/bu/spring2023/xc410)
    > (code: ds4g) -- Used as the primary method for communication with
    > and within the class. Please use instructor-only posts to
    > communicate with instructors rather than email.

-   Gradescope:
    > [[https://www.gradescope.com/courses/478632]{.ul}](https://www.gradescope.com/courses/478632)
    > -- Used to submit and grade most class work.

-   Blackboard:
    > [[https://learn.bu.edu/ultra/courses/\_93758_1/cl/outline]{.ul}](https://learn.bu.edu/ultra/courses/_93758_1/cl/outline)
    > -- Used to give an indication of your grade during the course of
    > the semester. Some course/home work will be distributed here as
    > well. Piazza posts will guide you on where to submit work.

-   Trello: Used to drive project work for the course of the semester.
    > Your Trello board will be created/assigned once you are attached
    > to a project. However, if you do not have a Trello account, please
    > get one soon: [[https://trello.com]{.ul}](https://trello.com). If
    > you are unfamiliar with Trello, this tutorial can help:
    > https://trello.com/en/guide

-   Github: Used to deliver software/documentation work for your
    > project. Your repository will be assigned once your project is.
    > However, if you don't have an account, please sign up for one:
    > [[https://github.com/]{.ul}](https://github.com/). If you are
    > unfamiliar with Github, this tutorial can help:
    > [[https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/hello-world]{.ul}](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/hello-world).

-   Slack: Used for communication related to your projects. Slack
    > channels will likely include PMs, TEs, instructors, and your team
    > mates. Slack channels **may** include your clients. As a result,
    > be sure what channel you are communicating in before you do it and
    > professional communication is required **at all times**. If you do
    > not have any experience with Slack, these tutorials will help:
    > [[https://slack.com/help/categories/360000049063]{.ul}](https://slack.com/help/categories/360000049063).
    > Please also note, if you have experience with Discord, Slack is
    > very similar.

## Strongly recommended reading and engagement:

-   [[10 Best Practices for Analytics Success
    > (MIT)]{.ul}](https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/10-best-practices-analytics-success-including-3-you-cant-ignore)

-   [[What\'s the Best Approach to Data Analytics?
    > (Harvard)]{.ul}](https://hbr.org/2020/03/whats-the-best-approach-to-data-analytics)

Please do not hesitate to reach out privately if you have any concerns
about obtaining the required or recommended equipment and materials so
we can try to help.

